# 10/24/16

Suppose we have 3 fields

<account #>        <Date>         <amount>
3893624            04/20/1982     456.52

The answer to dealing with the table above is a Priority Queue
Priority queues can:
- insert
- remove Min(Max) (highest priority is removed first)

In computer science, a priority queue is an abstract data type which is like a regular queue or stack data structure, but where additionally each element has a "priority" associated with it. In a priority queue, an element with high priority is served before an element with low priority. If two elements have the same priority, they are served according to their order in the queue.
While priority queues are often implemented with heaps, they are conceptually distinct from heaps. A priority queue is an abstract concept like "a list" or "a map"; just as a list can be implemented with a linked list or an array, a priority queue can be implemented with a heap or a variety of other methods such as an unordered array.

Is a priority queue stable? There is no guarantee that this will be stable

Lets look at a few implementations of a Priority Queue:

**Unordered Array**

char [] A = {T,I,N,Y,C,A,T,S}
	*insert:*
		1. add an element to the end of array (O(1))

	`insert('S')` O(N)

	*remove:* O(1)
		1. One pass selection sort (O(N))
		2. Swap to the last position in the array.
		3. Then remove the last position in the array

	remove()

**Ordered Array**

char [] A = {A,C,I,N,T,T,Y}

	*insert:*
		1. Add item to end of array
		2. insertion sort to place it in its final position

	`insert('S')`

	*remove:*
		1. remove and return value at the end of the array

**Exercise**
For some # N design an algorithm that prints in sorted order all integers of the form a<sup>3</sup> + b<sup>3</sup> = c where 0 <= a,b <= N without reading all into memory & sorting

	1. Use a minimum oriented priority queue with the form (c,a,b)
	2. put (0,0,0) (1,1,0) (8,2,0)
	3. while PQ != empty, remove (c,a,b) print c then insert (a<sup>3</sup> + b<sup>3</sup>, a, (b + 1))

---

## Heap Ordering with priority queues!

We generally talk about Heap ordering when discussing binary trees.

To heap order a tree:
	where each node is larger than or equal to both children

Binary Heap Properties:
	1. Complete heap order and binary tree
	2. in memory as an array
	3. Parents of node as position K in array is at K/2
	4. the children of node at position K are at 2K and 2K+1

A = 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
		X 9 8 7 2 5 7 4
node k = 6
parent k = 3

**To move up the tree you divide the position k by 2 and to move down you multiply by 2**

When a node has become larger than its parent we use a function called swim, which swims them up the tree until heap order is reasserted. The alternative to this is a function called sink which will move the element down the tree until it is in the right spot

- For the swim operation all you do is swap the node with the parent
- For the sink operation you swap the parent with the larger of the two children

Remove:
	1. swap the last item with the root
	2. remove the root (Max) value [last item in array]
	3. sink root value to restore heap order

A : x T P R N H O A E I G
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

insert(s)
A : x T P R N H O A E I G  S
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

A : x T P R N S O A E I G  H
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

A : x T S R N P O A E I G  H
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

remove(Max)
A : x T S R N P O A E I G  H
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

A : x H S R N P O A E I G  T
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

A : x H S R N P O A E I G
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

A : x S H R N P O A E I G
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

A : x S P R N H O A E I G
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

A : x S P R N H O A E I G
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10		
---
