# 10/26/16

We are now going to be moving from sort algorithms to search algorithms
Symbol Tables are any form of data that is kept with a key value pair, an example of this could be a dictionary.
A compiler is also an example of a symbol table because it maps variables to memory locations. If you had a undeclared variable and you tried to set a value to that unassigned variable the compiler would throw an error because it didn't have an entry for the variable in its symbol table.

Symbol tables support 2 operations:
	1. insert
	2. retrieve


*public class SymbolTable<K, V>*
	SymbolTable()
	void put(K key, V value)
	V get(K key)
	void Delete(K key)
	bool contains(K key)
	boolean isEmpty()
	int size() //number of k-v pairs
	Iterable<K> keys();

- must be a 1-1 mapping
- Subsequent puts overwrite existing values
- No key duplicates
- null key is not allowed
- no key is associated with Null
- key equality is determined by object equality

## Unordered linked list (Sequential search)

Insert (T, 0)
			 (I, 1)
			 (N, 2)
			 (Y, 3)
			 (C, 4)
			 (A, 5)
			 (T, 6)

ST --> [A|5] --> [C|4] --> [Y|3] --> [N|2] --> [I|1] --> [T|6] --> NULL

get(A) = 5 search hit
get(T) = 6 search hit
get(Z) = null search miss

If we were to add N elements to a empty symbol table we would get a time function of N^2 since you would have to search and add to the symbol table. To fix this issue we are going to sort the symbol table. To do this we have to implement the comparable interface so we can compare the keys. This is because the keys are generic types so we don't know what the type of the object or primitive is that we are adding.

We can now implement binary search on this symbol table since it is ordered. Again binary search runs in O(log(n)) time.

```
Public class Ordered SymbolTable <K extends Comparable<K>, V>
	K min()
	K max()
	K floor(K k) // largest key <= k
	K ceiling(K k) // smallest key >=k
	int rank(K key) // number of keys less than key
	K select(int r) // give me the key at position r
	void deleteMin()
	void deleteMax()
	int size(K lo, K hi)
```

To insert into a symbol table it has a time complexity of O(N) because it has to scan the entire list to see if a key already exists

*We call the process of inserting, Indexing*

Ordered symbol table using binary search our parallel arrays K[], V[]

```

										Keys[]					Values[]
			 Insert				0 1 2 3 4 5   	0 1 2 3 4 5
			 (T, 0)				T               0
			 (I, 1)	      I T             1 0
			 (N, 2)       I N T           1 2 0
			 (Y, 3)       I N T Y         1 2 0 3
			 (C, 4)       C I N T Y       4 1 2 0 3
			 (A, 5)       A C I N T Y     5 4 1 2 0 3
			 (T, 6)       A C I N T Y     5 4 1 2 6 3
```

The issue we have with this is that to insert, worst case we have O(2N) and O(logN) for search. To improve upon insert we will implement a binary search tree.

**Claim**: Binary search over an ordered array w/ N keys uses no more than log(N)+1 compares

**Proof**: let C(N) be the number of compares to search for some key K in a S.T. of size N. Note if we are in the case of C(0) we have 0 compares to do. If we have C(1) we have 1 compare.
	1. C(N) <= C[N/2] + 1
	2. let N = 2<sup>n</sup>
	3. C(2<sup>n</sup>) <= C(2<sup>n</sup>/2) + 1
	4. C(2<sup>n</sup>) <= C(2<sup>n-1</sup>) + 1
	5. C(2<sup>1</sup>) <= C(22<sup>0</sup>) + 1
	6. C(2<sup>n</sup>) <= n + 1
	7. C(N) <= log(n) + 1

Floor pseudo-code

```
Floor(K, V, k, N)
Input:
	K - sorted array of keys
	V - array of values
	k - search keys
	N - number of elems
Output:
	largest key <= k

r <-- rank(K)
if(r >= N) then:
	return null
if( k[r] = k) then:
	return k[r]
```
