# 10/31/16

the two key options for symbol tables are `search` and `insert`

If we use binary search we can search an N size array over log(n) time

## Binary Search Trees
- each parent node can have a max of 2 children
- each child has one parent
- if there are no child node it points to null

Binary search trees has 3 distinct elements to it
- each node has a key
- the key has a well defined ordering
- the right is the larger element and the eft is the smaller child
- If you go down your left subtree, you are looking at smaller values
- Symbols have no equal elements (AKA no duplicate keys)


We use a recursive algorithm to search through this tree. When you come to a node each direction makes a new subtree. IF the subtree that you have entered is empty then you have a search miss (so return).

```
private class Node<K extends comparable<K>, K>{
  K key;
  V value;
  Node LeftChild;
  Node RightChild;
  int N; // optional metadata
}
```

If the key is equal to the key of the root of our tree then you have a search hit. If the key you are looking is less than the key at the root then you will pass the let child into the function `BsTs(Node, K)` and you would use the right child if the key you are looking for is greater than the root.
Below is an example of binary search tree.
```

      S
      /\
     E  X
    /\  /\
   A R  
  /\ /\
   C H
     /\
       M
```

Consider that we are searching for R.
  1. Start at S
  2. Go to E because R is less than S
  3. Go to R because R is greater than E
  4. realize that we are at the key we are looking for and we get a searchHit

Consider that we are searching for T.
  1. Start at S
  2. Go to X because T is greater than S
  3. see that both children are null so we get a searchMiss

Consider that we want to insert L
  1. go to E since L is less than S
  2. go to R since L is less than R
  3. go to H since L is greater than H
  4. go to M since L is less than M
  5. see that there are 2 Null children
  6. we now insert to the left tree since L is less than M

To remove the smallest element
  1. we keep following left until we get a Null and we return the node above Null

To remove the largest element
  1. we keep following right until we get a Null and we return the node above Null

## General case Delete:

Our goal is to replace the deleted node with he successor, we go to right of the tree and then find the minimum value for that subtree by following it right.

We have a 4 step process to make sure that when we promote nodes everything is in the right place
  1. Save the node you are deleting (we will call that T)
  2. look at T's right child then go left to find the smallest element. We will call that smallest value X. Set Parent node of T to point to our X
  3. We will set the right link of X to the subtree that is created by deleting the minimum out of the T and set it to the right child of the subtree created (moving the subtree of what we are replacing the root of T with its original subtree)
  4. Whatever is left in the subtree move to the left of the newly replaced node.
