# 11/9/16

see notebook for drawings of the redblack trees

In the worst case for red black trees there are 2log(N) max amount of operations successfully make a red black tree.

A red–black tree is a kind of self-balancing binary search tree. Each node of the binary tree has an extra bit, and that bit is often interpreted as the color (red or black) of the node. These color bits are used to ensure the tree remains approximately balanced during insertions and deletions.
Balance is preserved by painting each node of the tree with one of two colors (typically called 'red' and 'black') in a way that satisfies certain properties, which collectively constrain how unbalanced the tree can become in the worst case. When the tree is modified, the new tree is subsequently rearranged and repainted to restore the coloring properties. The properties are designed in such a way that this rearranging and recoloring can be performed efficiently.
The balancing of the tree is not perfect, but it is good enough to allow it to guarantee searching in O(log n) time, where n is the total number of elements in the tree. The insertion and deletion operations, along with the tree rearrangement and recoloring, are also performed in O(log n) time.
Tracking the color of each node requires only 1 bit of information per node because there are only two colors. The tree does not contain any other data specific to its being a red–black tree so its memory footprint is almost identical to a classic (uncolored) binary search tree. In many cases the additional bit of information can be stored at no additional memory cost.

## Hashing algorithms

N: number of keys
M: number of slots

since this is kept in an array, the length of the array is M

**key ideas**
  1. hash function f(key) = array position
  2. collision resolution
  3. performance goals/constraints

example of a very very bad hashing algorithm;

  ```
  public it hashCode(){
    return 17;
  }
  ```
_**Modular hashing**_

assume array of size M
assume M to be prime
f(key) = key % m;

32 bit system has a word size of 4
Word size: # of bytes used to represent data
1 byte = 8 bits
w = wordsize in bits
V = [V<sub>w-1</sub>, V<sub>w-2</sub> ... ...  V<sub>1</sub>, V<sub>0</sub>]
2's compliment is the way to encode a range of negative integers
we use V<sub>w-1</sub> to determine whether the number is negative or positive
Bto2C(v) = V<sub>w-1</sub> * 2<sup>w-1</sup> + (sum from 0 to w-2 of 2<sup>i</sup> * V<sub>i</sub>)

```
int hashCode(){
  return (X.hashCode() & 0x7FFFFFFFF) % M;
}
```

```
let R = 3;
int hash = 0;
for(int i = 0; i < s.length; i++){
  hash = (R * hash + s.charAt(i)) % M;
}

```

```
int hash = 0;
int skip = Math.max(1, s.length()/8);
for(int i = 0 ; i < s.length(); i+=skip){
  
}
```
